do grains qualify as a whole food well
certainly the vast the the the form in
which they are most frequently consumed
today absolutely not there most people
today you know the form of grains which
most people consume are refined grains
muffins yeah exactly right Health cake
and even if you were to go to go to
Google images and look at the image of
the food pyramid which thankfully has
been retired you know it's what it's
been replaced by is you know I would say
not that much better um although it is
an improvement but I mean it was
literally the The Illustrated us USDA
food permid it was like pasta it was
like loaves of bread yeah like you're
telling me that That's essential for
good health that I need to be eating
seven to 11 servings of this on a daily
basis um and so if you actually look at
what a grain is I mean you know most
grains today actually in the supermarket
are fortified because they're so
nutrient impoverished that they have to
have added nutrients um nutrients added
to them to make their basic form serve
any sort of dietary value at all but
they're essentially pure it's
essentially Pure Energy it's cattle feed
now I'm not saying that grains can't
play a supportive role to health I mean
certainly you look at you know for
example bodybuilders who are in
fantastic physical shape you know it's
not they do uh you know many of them on
social media the more prominent ones do
use performance-enhancing drugs but I
mean grains grains can be used to
facilitate exercise performance and the
like and I think if well and you can say
too like socially speaking you know the
first order problem that our society had
to contend with was getting everyone
enough calories yeah right
and you could see some utility in
generating cheap calories I always I
often think about corn syrup in that
regard corn syrup is a very cheap source
of calories but when the problem is
obesity and not starvation corn syrup
seems like a very bad solution correct
and so you know I'm willing to give the
Department of Agriculture let's say its
credit for assuming that or for ensuring
that calories per se are in plentiful
Supply which is the case but man we're
playing a vicious price for it on the
other side of it yeah well I mean this
is the we we live amidst the first time
in human history where there are more
overweight people walking the Earth than
underweight right and so we've solved
the food scarcity problem I mean there's
you'd be hard pressed to find anybody in
a state of energy deficit today in the
western world yeah especially and
increasingly in the developed world
except when that's used for political
like most of the starvation in
particular in the developed world is
purpose
not not the consequence of of economic
in inadequacy right it's targeted and so
yeah and that's a good thing that we
solved that problem but but these
problems are not trivial either yeah and
they're getting worse correct and I'm
not saying that grains cause you know
Alzheimer's disease that's never been my
stance but you know we do have to look
at this as a food quality problem and
Grains I don't believe are you know
particularly when you have all these
options in the supermarket like
grass-fed grassfish beef wild fatty fish
salmon for example um sardines eggs you
know eggs are one of natur's cognitive
multivitamins a study was just published
that found that you know just consuming
they were demonized too they were
demonized too yeah and interestingly and
this is again and to preface I'll never
just to to reiterate I'll never know
what caused my mom's dementia I don't
know if it had anything to do with
nutrition it could have had everything
to do with I I don't know I'll never
know but you know my mom was somebody
who for the entirety of her life was
concerned about heart disease and so
whatever the messaging was around heart
disease is something that my mom adopted
and ingrained essentially in not just
her diet but my diet growing up and so
you know my kitchen was always filled
with you know lowfat fat-- free
cholesterol free food likee products
yeah that had adorned by the red heart
healthy logo on them which you still see
ubiquitously in the Super Market right
and eggs were one of those foods that we
threw out essentially in lie of these
more you know processed high margin
replacement products and an egg is
literally a cognitive multivitamin I
mean it contains a little bit of
everything required to grow a brain
right so it's it's it's postmarked by
Nature you know this is here this is
what you need to grow a brain in an egg
yolk right even if it's a chicken brain
even if it's a chicken brain yeah but
studies are now starting to show that
they're an incredible cognitive
multivitamin a study was just published
that found that you know all it takes is
one to two eggs a week in this one study
and there was a something like a 50%
risk close to a 50% risk reduction for
the development of Alzheimer's disease
wow we know that choline is one of the
most important nutrients in fact about
40% of the um the effect that they saw
in this observational trial um they
thought was attributed to the fact that
egg yolks are the top source of choline
in the standard American diet um and yet
90% of adults today don't consume the
adequate intake forine on a daily basis
and so that's the consequence of
demonizing eggs there you go you
demonize eggs great 90% of adults don't
consume adequate choline which is
crucially important it's the backbone to
acetal choline which is the
neurotransmitter involved in learning in
memory right it forms the you know
skeleton molecule of our neuronal
membranes which are crucially important
for our you know brain cell
communication our ability to perceive
the world um so it's a fantastic food
and you know know I remember when when
my mom first served me you know that
that egg my first egg she was like you
know she she warned me not to consume
them with any you know significant
frequency because they might clog my
arteries right and we know the dietary
cholesterol well the data was there a
long time ago showing that this I knew
this in like 19 the
1980s the decreased risk of heart
disease reported as a consequence of
cholesterol lowering was swamped by the
increase in suicide that was caused by
the fact that colorest cholesterol is a
precursor to serotonin so even if fewer
people died of heart attacks which is
probably not true anyways more people
committed suicide so that's part of the
problem with the complexity of dietary
studies right is you you need to control
for a lot of variables and you need to
measure a lot of outcomes yeah but with
these observational Stu I mean there's
always residual confounding like yes
always there's no way of controlling it
no no you can't do correlational dietary
studies yeah you just can't no no that
they should never be published yeah I
mean I'm I'm Pro plants you know that's
that's a flag that like you know that
I've that I've planted no pun intended
yeah but um but it's not hard to imagine
a world where you know all of the you
know the mountains of evidence that we
have observationally looking at you know
how fruits and vegetables impact human
health the positive effects that we see
that we see at the epidemiologic you
know scale that that could potentially
be a false positive because everybody in
my mother knows that fruits and
vegetables are good for you right and
eating fresh fruits and ve vegetables
today is an incredible privilege in a
time when you know 60% of the calories
come from these Ultra processed foods it
can be really difficult to find you
access to fresh fruits and vegetables
right I mean we do have RCT data showing
us that that there are beneficial
compounds I've talked about some of the
phytochemicals in it but conversely red
meat it's also very easy okay so let's
talk about that a bit because I was
obviously at some point we're going to
get into the issue of the carnivore diet
yeah and so I guess the first thing I'd
say is and you're making some illusion
to it now obviously what are your
thoughts about the carnivore diet what
and its potential advantages and dangers
I think I mean I think it's potentially
a a great therapeutic diet for people
that have you know a predisposition to
autoimmunity yeah um and it's not
something that I would ever behold
anybody here's the other thing is that
diet zealots particularly today on
social media they're very they seem to
be very emotionally invested in what
other people eat I don't care ultimately
what other people eat I I feel the same
way about that you know at a at say a
moral level right but like or emo you
want people to be able to make informed
decisions not decisions clouded by what
I call covert activism right and yeah or
or over activism for for for for that
matter yeah or you know misinformation
or disinformation about what it means to
eat healthily today ultimately I don't
care you know somebody wants otherwise
known as lies yes precisely um so yeah I
mean I would for people that are that
have seen a reprieve of symptoms from
some of these awful conditions that
people suffer from yeah like keep doing
it yeah I think that for somebody with a
robust microbiome who you know I think
people should be able to tolerate and
not just tolerate but to derive you know
a health benefit from you know many of
these so-called plant defense compounds
you know even cruciferous vegetables
which have become demonized in certain
carnivore circles you know due to you
know certain uh glucosinolate compounds
or compound like sulphoraphane which you
know there are actual randomized human
trials that show that these compounds
can actually help us detoxify from some
of these environmental pollutants that
we know you know play a role in disease
um obviously you can get a certain uh
dose if you will of phytochemicals from
eating animal Source foods but you know
carotenoids like ltin and zanthin which
we know are very beneficial to brain
health you know you're not going to see
a better you're not going to find a
better source of them in the supermarket
than kale for example which people love
to hate on but foods like kale spinach
dark leafy greens crucifer vegetables I
think that the I do think that for most
people the benefits outweigh the risk
yeah mhm
[Music]